Once around Riel.
So Riel is one of my favorite stars in
the night sky. Visible in the winter
here from Cambridge. We have the
constellation of Orion. Probably my
favorite constellation too. Now Riel is
beta Orionis.
Normally that would mean it would be the
second brightest star in Orion. And
that's because Bettle is given the alpha
label. Although actually sometimes Riel
is brighter. Bettle varies in magnitude
quite a bit. And in fact Riel does a
little bit as well. Goes from 0.05
to.18.
So very much zero magnitude on the
magnitude scale. And it's the seventh
brightest star in all of the night sky.
very prominent, very visible um and with
a classic sort of color contrast to its
diagonal neighbor Bettle. Bet is very
red. Riel definitely on the blue white
side of things and it's shown in this
fantastic picture of the wide area of
Orion with that color contrast. You can
see Bett at the top left and Riel at the
bottom right. You can see Orion's belt
and the very famous sword handle nebula
down there in the lower middle of the
screen with Barnard's Loop, that
semicircle of red hydrogen gas going
around it and uh fantastic gas clouds,
the Witch Head Nebula, all sorts of
things in Orion to go look for.
So, Riel itself, well, we think it's
about 850 light years away. Previous
estimates have had it actually as as far
away as 1,600. So nearly double that. So
again, we're gradually getting better at
pinning these things down using parallax
from uh the ground or parallax from
satellites like Hipparos shown there
using the Earth's orbit as a baseline
and doing some trigonometry
or uh the more modern GIA satellite has
been extremely helpful. But it GIA
doesn't really like these very very
powerful bright stars. So they tend to
overload its optics. Um so it's uh not
actually done very well on some of these
really powerful stars. And Riel really
is powerful. It's a Bclass super giant,
a blue super giant star. Uh temperature
on the surface 12,000° C. Quite
incredible. And depending on that
distance, you either if it's nearer, we
think it's probably 65,000
times the light output of the sun, but
if it's twice as far away, then
correspondingly by the standard candle
rule, it should be four times brighter.
And so you get a figure up in the uh
360,000
times as bright for the larger distance
estimates. And there is still some
debate about that.
Now uh it's also a little bit variable
as I said and it has this rather odd
light curve shown there seems to wander
up and down and we think this is a
combination of eruptions on the surface
uh star spots essentially and flares or
uh just the pulsation of the outer
envelope the outer atmosphere of Riel
internally well we have a star that's
somewhere between 18 and 24s times as
massive as the sun and losing atmosphere
10 million times faster. The incredible
output of solar wind and solar flux that
these uh massive stars have with their
in intense high radiation and
temperature. And we think that this is a
double layer of fusion that's going on.
So you have the core containing mostly
helium from the first phase of its life
where it turned hydrogen to helium and
that helium has now ignited and is well
and truly fusing away creating carbon
and even oxygen inside the core around
that. There is a second layer of fusion
going on where hydrogen is being
converted to helium. So all of that
central mass is producing vast amounts
of energy and some of the helium is
being dragged up to the surface.
The big bang created 25%
of helium and roughly 3/4 75% hydrogen.
Riel is now showing about 32% helium on
the surface. So that's a lot of that
internal helium that it's made itself
being brought up to the surface probably
mostly during what's called the helium
flash where that core of helium suddenly
ignited to produce uh carbon and oxygen
and uh we can see some of that carbon,
oxygen and some nitrogen which is a
byproduct. um where you hit a carbon
nucleus with a hydrogen nucleus, you can
make nitrogen.
And uh so those elements are starting to
show up on the surface in what's called
a dredge up process where elements made
in the core make it to the outside.
It's a big star, 75 times the radius of
the sun. And there's this diagram here
that shows the sun as being an invisible
tiny speck. some of the other stars,
Sirius, Pollock, Arcturus, then Riel,
the blue super giant. But although it's
called a super giant, it is nowhere near
as big as the true red super giants. The
red ones are always larger than their
blue counterparts. Um and so it's
they've swollen up to this immense size
whereas Riel is still a relatively
modest uh by comparison
in terms of its evolution at uh round
about 20 solar masses. I think the
latest figure is 21. It will take the
path shown here. Uh so we've got uh
different masses show 9 25 40 and 85 as
the evolutionary trajectories for these
massive blue and blue white stars and
it'll be roughly along the line of where
it says 25 for the uh M sun. So it will
progress from being a blue giant on the
uh main sequence line. It's already done
that moved over to being a red giant
and then it's undergone that helium
flash where it ignited the helium to
carbon fusion in the core. That means
that that core is then also contributing
to the power output and so the star
becomes much more efficient overall in
terms of its power to weight ratio and
the temperature rises again. So it then
heads across on what's called a blue
loop over to the left hand side of the
diagram where it probably is now. And
then as the carbon and oxygen ash builds
up inside the core, it will lose
efficiency again and move back to the
right hand side of the diagram, cooling
its outer layers and swelling up uh to
the yellow and then the red super giant
phase. But then finally it will undergo
the final rounds of nuclear fusion
creating the elements up to iron. So
neon, silicon, magnesium, sulfur and
many others all the way up to iron on
the periodic table and then undergo a
core collapse type 2 supernova as it is
unable to release any more uh nuclear
energy.
the core collapses and depending on the
mass it will either form a neutron star
or more likely at this sort of level. So
around about 25 solar masses is probably
the cutff between neutron star and black
hole. Not entirely sure and it depends a
little bit on what happens but it will
form either one or the other as its
final destiny blowing itself apart.
Now, it's got a companion now, Riel B, a
small faint star uh just uh under 10
arcsec away. And you can see it as the
rather slightly fuzzy pale blue dot
there next to its bright companion. Very
hard to pin down and uh discover in the
first place because uh of the proximity
to the very very bright main A star. And
this orbits around in 24,000 years. So a
very long uh time scale but with a
combination of knowing that orbit
relatively well we can pin down the mass
of the primary using Kepler's third law
of orbital motion. Um that's very good
way of being able to get the mass of the
main star.
So that B star is in fact a triple star.
So there is B and B is composed of BA
and BB which orbit each other in just 10
days and then there is C which orbits
the B pair every 63 days and so it's
quite a complex system this one. All
three of those components are also B
type main sequence stars so they're less
massive. The uh BA and C stars come in
at 3.84
times the mass of the sun and BB a
little smaller at 2.94.
So they're all more massive than the
sun, but uh nowhere near the mass of the
main 21 solar mass primary, the A star.
So the A star has evolved more rapidly,
that far a larger mass. big stars live
fast and die young. Um whereas these
smaller stars um will last a lot longer.
Of course, they're in for trouble when
in a few million years time Riel A
reaches its final stage. Um we'll see
what happens then.
There is a possible D component, but
this is further away and in potentially
an orbit that takes 250,000
years to go around. Now, that's
difficult to comprehend and difficult to
be sure whether it's actually in a
captured orbit or not. So, we're not
certain about that at the moment.
And when we look at Riel in the night
sky with a long exposure, we can track
down the Witch Head Nebula. This uh
ghostly white band of material in the
right hand side of this lovely image
here showing Riel illuminating from the
left this reflection nebula. So the
light is the light from Riel bouncing
back towards us uh rather than the
glowing of the nebula itself. is not
emitting its own light. It's reflecting
the light from Riel. So the color
matches that of the Riel star.
And this itself is the remains of an
ancient supernova. nothing to do with
Riel, but to do with one of uh the other
stars in and around this part of the uh
galaxy that has exploded and left this
uh remnant
line of material and it's now Riel's
turn to explode next. Um the strong
stellar wind from Riel is not only uh
emitting from the star but pushing on
the Witch Head Nebula and gradually
blowing it away. And you can see a
little bit of that in the structure of
it. Um, and because it's so well lit, we
can also use that light to study the
contents of the cloud and detecting
simple molecules there. Carbon monoxide
for one. Now, it's always easier to
detect simple molecules than complex
ones because they have simpler modes of
behavior. What we're actually detecting
is the rotational and vibrational modes
of oscillation of the molecules. And if
you only have two atoms, well, there's
very few things you can do. You can uh
vibrate in and out or you can rotate
around and that's it. So, the spectrum
are nice and strong and simple and easy
to detect. Whereas much more complicated
molecules with dozens of atoms in them,
well, it gets quite hard to pick the
spectra apart. So, I'm sure there are
lots more chemicals in that cloud to be
found. So, that was a quick tour of Riel
and its environment. So, thanks very
much for listening to that one and uh
I'll leave you with the amazing picture
of Orion.